A postmortem (blog post) on our "Is GA illegal" microsite (#2945)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/is-google-analytics-illegal-microsite.md

---
date: 2022-03-01

> title: "Google Analytics was deemed illegal in some EU countries. We built a microsite in 48 hours to capitalize on the news."

Reviewer: Generally we should say 'use of' rather than GA itself in this article - especially when making claims about legality, we should take extra care to be precise in our language.

rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/is-ga-illegal-microsite.png
author: ["cory-watilo"]
categories: ["Inside PostHog"]
---

> On January 14, 2022, the world learned that Austria declared Google Analytics to be illegal (in its default form), since it transmits IP addresses to the United States. Both Austria and The Netherlands both announced the news within days of each other.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On January 14, 2022, the world learned that Austria had declared Google Analytics to be illegal (in its default form), since it transmits IP addresses to the United States. The Netherlands declared the same view only days later.
```

## A timeline

### It all started when our CTO shared the news on Slack

![The Netherlends also likely to declare Google Analytics illegal](../images/blog/is-ga-illegal-microsite/illegal-in-austria.png)

### Then our VP of Ops came up with an idea to launch a microsite

![Is this idea funny or just really dumb?](../images/blog/is-ga-illegal-microsite/is-this-funny-or-just-really-dumb.png)

### Obviously this felt like a fun idea, so I put together a quick joke of a wireframe

![Is GA illegal?](../images/blog/is-ga-illegal-microsite/is-it-illegal-probably.png)

### Soon we had a gimmicky domain name and the idea was born

![Greatest domain name ever](../images/blog/is-ga-illegal-microsite/is-google-analytics-illegal.png)

### I remember being on a flight at the time. What better way to spend a couple hours in coach than to whip up a mock?

![1 hour mockup](../images/blog/is-ga-illegal-microsite/mockup.png)

## How we positioned the site

> We planned to launch this site on Hacker News, a site known for having an audience that really doesn’t like being sold to. If it doesn’t come across as authentic, be prepared to be torn to shreds.

Reviewer: I would reframe this a bit as 'We decided to share the site on Hacker News'. Otherwise it sounds like we built a site specifically for the purposes of sharing on Hacker News, which definitely wasn't the plan - generally we make cool stuff first, and then think about where to share it. In this case, HN seemed like the obvious channel.

Thankfully one of our marketing values is “No sneaky shit.” I can’t say it better than it’s already stated [in our Company Handbook](https://posthog.com/handbook/growth/marketing#no-sneaky-shit):

> Our focus customers are technical and acutely aware of the tedious clickbaity marketing tactics that software companies use to try and entice them. Stop. It's patronizing to both the customer and the marketing people creating the content.<br /><br />
> We will never try to trick someone into using PostHog through spammy marketing tactics. That's a great way to boost vanity signup metrics in the short term before the customer quickly churns out.

### Our challenges

How can we:

- have a little fun with this site concept
- provide real value to our visitors
- see an uptick in traffic to PostHog.com
- make it obvious we’re not trying to make this solely a marketing stunt?

### 1. Provide value: **Include our competitors and let anyone add to the list**

We seeded our [Google Analytics alternatives](https://isgoogleanalyticsillegal.com/alternatives) page with all of the competitors we could think of who would solve this problem for companies affected by this ruling:

> - Open source analytics tools

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Open-source analytics tools
```

- Self-hostable analytics tools
- Analytics providers in the EU, where customer data isn’t transmitted to the United States

We also [published our codebase on GitHub](https://github.com/PostHog/isgoogleanalyticsillegal.com), where anyone can submit a pull request to add another competitor to the list.

### 2. Don’t take it too seriously

> When you hover over the map of countries where Google Analytics has been deemed illegal, you’ll see a photo of Ursula von der Leyen, the President of the European Commission, inferring her enthusiasm about the rulings.

Reviewer: 'indicating her enthusiasm' would be better (inferring doesn't quite make sense here)

![6EF42A7B-3EED-4852-884C-DEAA407A701E.jpeg](../images/blog/is-ga-illegal-microsite/6EF42A7B-3EED-4852-884C-DEAA407A701E.jpeg)

### Some people liked the design, others didn’t (typical Hacker News!)

As the designer on this microsite, I’d like to extend a shout out to melissalobos for the design love. (As a designer with perpetual imposter syndrome, it’s always nice to hear!)

It was quickly followed up by the contrarian opinion, followed by a discussion about said opinions. (Would it really be a Hacker News thread if it *didn’t* go down this rabbit hole?)

![7BCF2377-DE39-4B1F-8019-1180C49D55CC.jpeg](../images/blog/is-ga-illegal-microsite/7BCF2377-DE39-4B1F-8019-1180C49D55CC.jpeg)

### Consider how people will interpret what you’re *not* actually saying

On the site, we ask the question: “Is Google Analytics illegal?” We are not stating Google Analytics *is* illegal.

Countries required to follow GDPR can still use Google Analytics if they don’t transmit personal data like IP address.

Unfortunately, not everyone understood this distinction.

![D99263DC-C425-4D0D-989D-48C57C899C82.jpeg](../images/blog/is-ga-illegal-microsite/D99263DC-C425-4D0D-989D-48C57C899C82.jpeg)

> Given the fact that one of our values is to not use sneaky marketing tactics, I'll won't deny we pushed the boundaries here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given the fact that one of our values is to not use sneaky marketing tactics, I won't deny we pushed the boundaries here.
```

---

> date: 2022-03-01

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2022-05-09
```

> title: "Use of Google Analytics was deemed illegal in some EU countries. We built a microsite in 48 hours to capitalize on the news."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Google Analytics was deemed 'illegal' in some EU countries. We built a microsite in 48 hours to capitalize on the news."
```

Author: Just FYI...

https://github.com/PostHog/posthog.com/pull/2945#discussion_r804467177

Reviewer 2: Nice, thanks. Will tweak.
